---
title: Data Character in Story
layout: lecture
tags:
  - characters
  - data characters
description: >-
  Mapping kinds of data to storytelling characters.
date: 2023-02-23
---

## Data Characters

 * Confidante
 * Dynamic
 * Flat
 * Foil
 * Round
 * Static
 * Stock

notes:
today I just want to give you a few ideas about how data can be thought of as characters

these are not EXACT definitions, but they might be useful for you when trying to tie storytelling principles to data in this class and in the future

---

## Data Characters

 * **Confidante**
 * **Dynamic**
 * Flat
 * Foil
 * **Round**
 * **Static**
 * Stock

We will think of these in terms of their **predictability** and their
**complexity**.

notes:
some of these definitions that can translate to data are *read*

---

## Data Characters

 * **Confidante**: someone in whom the central character confides, thus revealing the main character’s personality, thoughts, and intentions. The confidante does not need to be a person.
 * **Dynamic**
 * Flat
 * Foil
 * **Round**
 * **Static**
 * Stock

We will think of these in terms of their **predictability** and their
**complexity**.

(See e.g., [Ervin](http://www.fictionfactor.com/guests/common.html) )

notes:
from the definitions of ervin a confidant is *read*

---

## Data Characters

 * **Confidante**: someone in whom the central character confides, thus revealing the main character’s personality, thoughts, and intentions. The confidante does not need to be a person.
 * **Dynamic**
 * Flat
 * Foil
 * **Round**
 * **Static**
 * Stock

We will think of these in terms of their **predictability** and their
**complexity**.

(See e.g., [Ervin](http://www.fictionfactor.com/guests/common.html) )

**Example:** In a story, Melvin Sanders is a detective on the trail of a serial killer. He travels with his pet dog, a pug named Chops. Instead of listening to the radio, Melvin talks to Chops, telling him his theories about the serial killer and his concern he may never discover the killer’s identity.

notes:
the example ervin gives is...

---

## Data Characters

 * **Confidante**: someone in whom the central character confides, thus revealing the main character’s personality, thoughts, and intentions. The confidante does not need to be a person.
 * **Dynamic**: a character which changes during the course of a story or novel. The change in outlook or character is permanent. Sometimes a dynamic character is called a developing character.
 * Flat
 * Foil
 * **Round**
 * **Static**
 * Stock

We will think of these in terms of their **predictability** and their
**complexity**.

(See e.g., [Ervin](http://www.fictionfactor.com/guests/common.html) )

notes:
ervin defines as...

---

## Data Characters

 * **Confidante**: someone in whom the central character confides, thus revealing the main character’s personality, thoughts, and intentions. The confidante does not need to be a person.
 * **Dynamic**: a character which changes during the course of a story or novel. The change in outlook or character is permanent. Sometimes a dynamic character is called a developing character.
 * Flat
 * Foil
 * **Round**
 * **Static**
 * Stock

We will think of these in terms of their **predictability** and their
**complexity**.

(See e.g., [Ervin](http://www.fictionfactor.com/guests/common.html) )

**Example:** Ebenezer Scrooge, in A Christmas Carol by Dickens, was very stingy with his money. He worked his employees very very hard for little pay. After his experiences with the ghosts that visited him, he changed his ways, paying his employees a more than fair wage, providing days off work and actually giving gifts.

notes:
ervin defines as...

---

## Data Characters

 * **Confidante**: someone in whom the central character confides, thus revealing the main character’s personality, thoughts, and intentions. The confidante does not need to be a person.
 * **Dynamic**: a character which changes during the course of a story or novel. The change in outlook or character is permanent. Sometimes a dynamic character is called a developing character.
 * Flat
 * Foil
 * **Round**: a well developed character who demonstrates varied and sometimes contradictory traits. Round characters are usually dynamic (change in some way over the course of a story).
 * **Static**
 * Stock

We will think of these in terms of their **predictability** and their
**complexity**.

(See e.g., [Ervin](http://www.fictionfactor.com/guests/common.html) )

notes:
another useful character with similarities to data is...

---

## Data Characters

 * **Confidante**: someone in whom the central character confides, thus revealing the main character’s personality, thoughts, and intentions. The confidante does not need to be a person.
 * **Dynamic**: a character which changes during the course of a story or novel. The change in outlook or character is permanent. Sometimes a dynamic character is called a developing character.
 * Flat
 * Foil
 * **Round**: a well developed character who demonstrates varied and sometimes contradictory traits. Round characters are usually dynamic (change in some way over the course of a story).
 * **Static**
 * Stock

We will think of these in terms of their **predictability** and their
**complexity**.

(See e.g., [Ervin](http://www.fictionfactor.com/guests/common.html) )

**Example:** A character in a story named Elaine never cuts anybody a break. She tells her friends and coworkers that charity and compassion have no place in society. On the other hand, Elaine can never pass up feeding a stray kitten or puppy, and always tries to find a good home for lost or abandoned pets.

notes:
an example is...

---

## Data Characters

 * **Confidante**: someone in whom the central character confides, thus revealing the main character’s personality, thoughts, and intentions. The confidante does not need to be a person.
 * **Dynamic**: a character which changes during the course of a story or novel. The change in outlook or character is permanent. Sometimes a dynamic character is called a developing character.
 * Flat
 * Foil
 * **Round**: a well developed character who demonstrates varied and sometimes contradictory traits. Round characters are usually dynamic (change in some way over the course of a story).
 * **Static**: a character that remains primarily the same throughout a story or novel. Events in the story do not alter a static character’s outlook, personality, motivation, perception, habits, etc.
 * Stock

We will think of these in terms of their **predictability** and their
**complexity**.

(See e.g., [Ervin](http://www.fictionfactor.com/guests/common.html) )

notes:
a final example of a character that translates nicely to data is...

---

## Data Characters

 * **Confidante**: someone in whom the central character confides, thus revealing the main character’s personality, thoughts, and intentions. The confidante does not need to be a person.
 * **Dynamic**: a character which changes during the course of a story or novel. The change in outlook or character is permanent. Sometimes a dynamic character is called a developing character.
 * Flat
 * Foil
 * **Round**: a well developed character who demonstrates varied and sometimes contradictory traits. Round characters are usually dynamic (change in some way over the course of a story).
 * **Static**: a character that remains primarily the same throughout a story or novel. Events in the story do not alter a static character’s outlook, personality, motivation, perception, habits, etc.
 * Stock

We will think of these in terms of their **predictability** and their
**complexity**.

(See e.g., [Ervin](http://www.fictionfactor.com/guests/common.html) )

**Example:** Bert, a bumbling salesman, never takes the time to organize his files, properly record his sales, or follow up with customers. Finally, his boss gets fed up and fires him. Bert struggles for two months to find a new sales position. Bert finally finds a new sales position but soon Bert is informed he must get organized or he’ll be fired. A week later the new boss fires Bert after he fails to follow up with an important customer.

notes:
an example is...

---

## Data Characters: Confidante

Revealing information through indirect information.  Patterns or information
casting "shadows" that reveal the original.

 <!-- .slide: data-background-image="images/confidante1.svg" data-background-size="contain" --> 
 
notes:
here we see a draw the data and we see a pattern in the data 

---

## Data Characters: Confidante

Revealing information through indirect information.  Patterns or information
casting "shadows" that reveal the original.

 <!-- .slide: data-background-image="images/confidante2.svg" data-background-size="contain" --> 

notes:
maybe we plot another data line from a similar source and see a very similar pattern -- this is a "shadow" of the original data that is "confiding" in us that there is a pattern

---

## Data Characters: Dynamic (the Wildcard!)

They're the one who changes all the time!  Minute to minute, you don't know
what you're going to get.  They're all over the place, and sometimes you can
contain their behavior, but not always!

notes:
while sometimes the change in the data has a natural "beginning" and "end" like the story of Ebenizer scroge changing his behavior...

---

## Data Characters: Dynamic (the Wildcard!)

They're the one who changes all the time!  Minute to minute, you don't know
what you're going to get.  They're all over the place, and sometimes you can
contain their behavior, but not always!

 <!-- .slide: data-background-image="images/wildcard.svg" data-background-size="contain" --> 

notes:
... but, sometimes there is no desernable pattern!

---

## Data Characters: Round

Complex, many different attributes, hiding what might be rich relationships
between characteristics.

 <!-- .slide: data-background-image="images/round.svg" data-background-size="contain" --> 
 
notes:
so here, there might be some predictable patterns in the data, but unlike the confidante, there might be contridictory trends present if you view the data along different axis or columns -- this can often be the case with multi-dimensional data that encodes conflicting, complex, or dependant relationships

---

## Data Characters: Static

You pretty much know what to expect.  Take a glance at first, get a sense of
the parameters, and you can roughly figure it out from there.

 <!-- .slide: data-background-image="images/static1.svg" data-background-size="contain" --> 

---

## Data Characters: Static

You pretty much know what to expect.  Take a glance at first, get a sense of
the parameters, and you can roughly figure it out from there.

 <!-- .slide: data-background-image="images/static2.svg" data-background-size="contain" --> 
 
notes:
for example, perhaps your data fits into a templete, or you have data that confirms earlier data


---

## Data Plot: What is the data telling us?

 * There's a pattern, or background story
 * Things change
 * There's something hidden in these data!
 
notes:
we can also think of talking about our data using the different narrative structures Kate introduced us to in Week 2

---

## Data Plot: What is the data telling us?

 * There's a pattern, or background story (Equilibrium)
 * Things change (Hero's Journey)
 * There's something hidden in these data! (Enigma)

